THERE ARE SOME
GREAT QUESTIONS
THAT HAVE INTRIGUED
AND HAUNTED US
SINCE THE DAWN
OF HUMANITY.
WHAT IS OUT THERE?
HOW DID WE
GET HERE?
WHAT IS THE
WORLD MADE OF?
THE STORY OF OUR SEARCH
TO ANSWER THESE QUESTIONS
IS THE STORY
OF SCIENCE.
OF ALL HUMAN
ENDEAVORS,
SCIENCE HAS HAD THE
GREATEST IMPACT ON OUR LIVES,
ON HOW WE SEE THE WORLD,
ON HOW WE SEE OURSELVES.
ITS IDEAS, ITS ACHIEVEMENTS,
ITS RESULTS ARE ALL AROUND US.
BUT THE STORY OF
SCIENCE HAS BEEN SHAPED
AS MUCH BY WHAT'S OUTSIDE
THE LABORATORY AS INSIDE.
POWER AND PASSION,
RIVALRY AND SHEER CHANCE
HAVE ALL PLAYED
SIGNIFICANT ROLES.
THIS IS THE STORY OF
HOW HISTORY MADE SCIENCE
AND HOW SCIENCE
MADE HISTORY.
THIS TIME, THE MOST PERSONAL
QUESTION WE'VE ASKED:
HOW DID WE
GET HERE?
WHAT'S INTRIGUING ABOUT THE
QUESTION OF HOW DID WE GET HERE
IS REALLY JUST HOW LONG IT
TOOK FOR IT TO BE ASKED AT ALL
BECAUSE MOST PEOPLE BELIEVED
THEY ALREADY KNEW THE ANSWER
HANDED DOWN FROM CREATION
STORIES OR RELIGIOUS TEXTS.
BUT EVENTUALLY SCIENCE
WOULD FORCE PEOPLE
TO LOOK ELSEWHERE
FOR THE ANSWER.
AND IT'S A STORY WHICH
BEGINS ON THE HIGH SEAS
A LITTLE OVER
500 YEARS AGO.
THE GREAT VOYAGES OF
DISCOVERY OF THE 15TH CENTURY
HERALDED THE START
OF THE MODERN WORLD.
ADVANCES IN NAVIGATION
AND SHIP BUILDING
ALLOWED ADVENTURERS
TO EXPLORE AND EXPLOIT
THE REST OF THE GLOBE,
LEADING TO ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT EVENTS
IN HUMAN HISTORY:
THE EUROPEAN DISCOVERY
OF THE AMERICAS.
THE FIRST EXPLORERS CAME TO THE
NEW WORLD UTTERLY CONVINCED
THAT THEY WERE SPECIAL, SET
APART FROM THE REST OF NATURE
- THE PINNACLE
OF GOD'S CREATION.
THAT THIS ATTITUDE
GRADUALLY BEGAN TO CHANGE
IS THANKS IN NO SMALL
PART TO AN IRISH DOCTOR
CALLED
HANS SLOANE.
IN 1687 SLOANE ARRIVED
ON THE ISLAND OF JAMAICA
AS PERSONAL PHYSICIAN
TO THE GOVERNOR.
BUT SLOANE WAS ALSO
A PASSIONATE BOTANIST
WHO LOVED TO GO EXPLORING
THE ISLAND ON HORSEBACK
IN SEARCH OF
WHAT HE CALLED
"ALL THAT IS
EXTRAORDINARY IN NATURE".
MARLON BEALE IS ALSO A
BOTANIST BASED IN JAMAICA'S
BLUE MOUNTAINS - SOMEWHERE
SLOANE VISITED MANY TIMES.
SLOANE FIRST AND
FOREMOST WAS A DOCTOR,
A DOCTOR WHO WAS INTERESTED
IN FINDING MEDICINES.
SO WHEN HE CAME TO JAMAICA,
JAMAICA WOULD BE FILLED WITH
LUSH, GREEN
FORESTS...
WONDERFUL FOR HIM
TO FIND MEDICINES IN.
HERE WE HAVE A HEADACHE
BUSH, SO NAMED BECAUSE
IT CAN CURE
YOUR HEADACHES.
WHAT I'M GOING TO DO IS PULL OFF
A FEW LEAVES AND CRUSH THEM AND
BASICALLY YOU GET A REALLY NICE
PUNGENT SMELL THAT ALLOWS YOU,
WHEN YOU SMELL IT,
TO CURE YOUR HEADACHE.
SO COMMITTED WAS SLOANE
TO HIS TASK THAT HE WOULD
OFTEN SPEND DAYS AT A
TIME OUT IN THE FIELD...
A HANDS-ON APPROACH THAT
ENABLED HIM TO DOCUMENT
JAMAICA'S
AMAZING DIVERSITY.
THIS IS
WILD GINGER.
IT BELONGS TO THE FAMILY
KNOWN AS ZINGIBERACEAE
AND IT'S VERY
IMPORTANT...
ONE THAT SLOANE WOULD
HAVE BEEN LOOKING FOR.
IT HAS A LOT OF
MEDICINAL PROPERTIES.
IT'S BELIEVED TO HAVE BEEN
A CURE FOR SEASICKNESS
SO VERY, VERY
IMPORTANT.
BUT AN INTEREST IN NATURE
WASN'T CONFINED TO BOTANISTS
LIKE SLOANE BECAUSE IN NATURE,
AND PARTICULARLY PLANTS,
LAY THE FOUNDATIONS
OF IMPERIAL POWER.
TRADERS BEGAN TO BRING HOME
ALL SORTS OF NATURAL PRODUCE
FROM SUGAR AND SPICES
TO TEA AND TIMBER.
THE BOTANICAL BOOTY
WAS PRACTICALLY ENDLESS.
EVEN THE SHIPS WHICH
CARRIED THE GOODS
WERE THEMSELVES
BUILT FROM PLANTS.
THERE WERE TREES
FOR THE FRAMEWORK.
HEMP PROVIDED THE
SAILS AND THE ROPE.
AND FROM PINE
RESIN CAME PITCH
WHICH WAS USED TO
WATERPROOF THE SHIPS.
BUT WHILE OTHERS SHARED
THEIR INTEREST IN PLANTS,
WHAT SEPARATED
COLLECTORS LIKE SLOANE
FROM THE TRADERS
AND PLANTATION OWNERS
WAS A FASCINATION
WITH ALL OF NATURE -
BOTH PLANTS
AND ANIMALS...
AN ALL ENCOMPASSING
PASSION THAT WOULD OPEN
THE WORLD'S EYES, NOT JUST
TO THE BEAUTY OF CREATION,
BUT MORE IMPORTANTLY,
ITS DIVERSITY.
EVENTUALLY SLOANE
RETURNED TO ENGLAND.
NOT WITH TALL TALES OF
MERMAIDS AND SEA SERPENTS
BUT WITH
REAL SPECIMENS.
AND WHILE THERE WAS NO REASON
AS YET TO BELIEVE THAT ALL THIS
DIVERSITY HAD ANYTHING TO DO
WITH US AND HOW WE GOT HERE,
IT DID BEGIN TO JAR
WITH TRADITIONAL IDEAS
OF GOD'S CREATION.
BY THE TIME HANS SLOANE
DIED IN 1753 HE HAD AMASSED
THE WORLD'S GREATEST
COLLECTION OF NATURAL OBJECTS.
THE VAST MAJORITY OF WHICH
ARE STILL WITH US TODAY.
THERE ARE MANY
THOUSANDS OF OBJECTS.
ABOUT 14,000 OF THESE
VEGETABLE SUBSTANCES...
FLOWERS, FRUITS, DRIED
OBJECTS WHICH WE CAN'T PRESS.
AND WITH THAT THERE ARE
ABOUT 270 BOUND VOLUMES
WITH MANY, MANY
THOUSANDS OF SPECIMENS.
AFTER HIS VOYAGE TO
JAMAICA SLOANE DIDN'T
REALLY DO ANY PERSONAL
COLLECTING HIMSELF.
HE ACTUALLY SAT IN THE
MIDDLE OF A GROUP OF PEOPLE
WHO COLLECTED MATERIAL OR
HAD MATERIAL GIVEN TO THEM
FROM A VERY WIDE RANGE
OF PLACES IN THE WORLD.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, HERE, THIS
OBJECT IS ACTUALLY JUNIPER
AND WAS COLLECTED BY A
CAPTAIN JENKINS IN GEORGIA
CURRENT
UNITED STATES.
SO IT'S PROBABLY ONE OF
THE FIRST JUNIPER SPECIMENS
THAT STILL SURVIVES
THAT WE'VE ACTUALLY
GOT IN OUR COLLECTIONS.
IN FACT, SO VAST WAS SLOANE'S
HORDE OF NATURAL WONDERS
THAT IT WAS EVENTUALLY
MOVED TO A NEW TYPE
OF INSTITUTION BEGINNING
TO APPEAR ACROSS EUROPE:
THE NATIONAL
MUSEUM.
PRIVATE COLLECTIONS LIKE
SLOANE'S WERE NOW ACCESSIBLE
TO A MUCH
LARGER AUDIENCE...
BRINGING NATURE OUT
OF THE WILDERNESS
AND INTO THE
EVERYDAY WORLD.
AND THAT WAS VITAL
IN SCIENTIFIC ENDEAVOR,
HAVING THEM IN
AN ACCESSIBLE PLACE
WHERE PEOPLE COULD
HAVE A DIALOGUE AND
REALLY GET TO UNDERSTAND
THE DIVERSITY OF THE PLANET.
A NEW CURIOSITY ABOUT LIFE
ON EARTH WOULD NOW BRING US
CLOSER TO THE QUESTION
OF HOW DID WE GET HERE
FUELED BY VOYAGES
OF DISCOVERY
AND THE MONEY TO
BE MADE FROM NATURE
BY OBSESSIVE COLLECTORS
LIKE HANS SLOANE
WHO BEGAN TO DOCUMENT
NATURE'S DIVERSITY...
AND MUSEUMS, WHICH
MEANT ORDINARY PEOPLE
COULD SEE IT
FOR THEMSELVES.
AND IT NOW TURNED OUT
THAT ALL THIS DIVERSITY
ALSO HAD A
HISTORY...
A RATHER
RICH ONE.
OUR STORY MOVES TO FRANCE
WHERE THE TRADITIONAL IDEA
OF GOD'S FIXED UNIVERSE
WAS ABOUT TO BE FURTHER
UNDERMINED THANKS TO
A BRILLIANT ANATOMIST
AND AN INDUSTRY
DEEP UNDERGROUND.
DIRECTLY BENEATH PARIS LIES AN
OLD NETWORK OF STONE QUARRIES
LINKED BY A SERIES OF
CONNECTING TUNNELS.
TOGETHER THEY FORM A MIRROR
IMAGE OF THE CITY ABOVE
EVEN DOWN TO
THE STREET NAMES.
GILLES THOMAS IS AN EXPERT
ON THIS SUBTERRANEAN WORLD.
TRANSLATOR: THERE ARE ABOUT
150 KILOMETERS OF TUNNELS
ROUGHLY 20 METERS
BENEATH THE SURFACE.
NOW AND THEN YOU COME
ACROSS THESE OLD QUARRIES
USED IN THE BUILDING
OF MUCH OF PARIS.
30% OF THE STONE IN NOTRE DAME
ACTUALLY CAME FROM THIS QUARRY.
AS MORE QUARRIES
WERE EXCAVATED
PEOPLE BEGAN TO TAKE A
GREATER INTEREST IN THE
MYSTERIOUS OBJECTS THEY WERE
FINDING EMBEDDED IN THE ROCK.
TRANSLATOR: FROM TIME TO
TIME YOU CAN SEE THE ORIGINAL
CEILING OF THE QUARRY
WHICH ARE FULL OF FOSSILS.
ALL THESE FOSSILS FORMED
AT THE BOTTOM OF THE SEA
ABOUT 45 MILLION
YEARS AGO.
MOST OF THEM ARE THESE
VERY SMALL SEASHELLS.
BUT ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE
RIVER AND BENEATH THE SUBURBS
YOU CAN ALSO FIND
MUCH BIGGER ONES.
FOR A LONG TIME PEOPLE HAD NO
IDEA WHAT FOSSILS REALLY WERE.
SOME CLAIMED THEY HAD
FALLEN FROM THE MOON.
OTHERS THAT THEY WERE
MUD'S UNSUCCESSFUL ATTEMPT
TO TURN INTO LIFE.
IT WASN'T UNTIL THE 18TH CENTURY
THAT PEOPLE FULLY APPRECIATED
THEY HAD ONCE BEEN LIVING
THINGS, AND THIS REALIZATION
OPENED UP A WHOLE NEW
WINDOW INTO THE PAST...
A PAST THAT WAS
BOTH VERY ANCIENT
AND UNIMAGINABLY
DIFFERENT.
HERE IN FRANCE MANY OF
THOSE FOSSILS ENDED UP
IN THE HANDS OF A
BRILLIANT SCIENTIST...
A MAN OBSESSED
BY OLD BONES.
HIS NAME WAS GEORGES CUVIER
AND HE WAS WIDELY REGARDED
AS THE WORLD'S LEADING
ANIMAL ANATOMIST.
THERE WAS BARELY AN
ANIMAL IN EXISTENCE
WHOSE REMAINS
HADN'T COME HIS WAY.
TRANSLATOR: THE YOUNG
NATURALIST GEORGES CUVIER
ARRIVED HERE AT THE MUSEUM AT
THE AGE OF 25 FROM NORMANDY
AND BROUGHT WITH HIM A
NEW WAY OF STUDYING ANIMALS.
CUVIER OPENED AND
DISSECTED ANIMALS
AND STUDIED THEIR
ORGANS AND BONES,
COMPARING EACH PART OF THE
SKELETON TO OTHER ANIMALS,
TAKING NOTE OF SIMILARITIES
AND DIFFERENCES.
AFTER A BIT HE BEGAN TO
NOTICE A CORRELATION
BETWEEN THE DIFFERENT
PARTS OF THE SKELETON.
BY EXAMINING THE FORM OF ANY
BODY PART, CUVIER MAINTAINED
THAT ONE COULD DISCOVER
EVERYTHING THERE WAS TO KNOW
ABOUT ITS FUNCTION, AND FROM
ITS FUNCTION ITS LIKELY SOURCE.
A REVOLUTIONARY TECHNIQUE
THAT ENABLED CUVIER
TO IDENTIFY MANY OF THE
PREVIOUSLY UNKNOWN FOSSILS
BEING DISCOVERED
BENEATH PARIS...
AND WHICH HE WOULD NOW
APPLY TO SOME REMAINS
NOT FROM FRANCE, BUT RUSSIA,
BELONGING TO AN ANIMAL
KNOWN TO THE LOCALS
AS THE MAMMOTH.
WHILE MOST PEOPLE CONSIDERED
MAMMOTHS TO BE CLOSE RELATIVES
OF MODERN ELEPHANTS,
CUVIER WAS NOT CONVINCED.
TRANSLATOR: CUVIER HAD THE IDEA
OF COMPARING THIS BIG TOOTH
FROM RUSSIA WITH THIS ONE IN
MY LEFT HAND WHICH IS FROM
AN AFRICAN ELEPHANT AND WHICH
YOU CAN SEE IS VERY DIFFERENT
BECAUSE THE SURFACE LAMINA
ARE THESE DIAMOND SHAPES.
AND THEY ARE NOT AS
NUMEROUS AS THOSE
ON THE TOOTH IN MY RIGHT
HAND FROM THE MAMMOTH.
IT HAS MANY MORE LAMINA
AND THEY ARE PARALLEL,
AND SO THEREFORE THIS
AFRICAN ELEPHANT'S TOOTH
IS VERY DIFFERENT TO
THIS TOOTH FROM RUSSIA.
SO DIFFERENT, IN FACT, AS
TO PERSUADE CUVIER THAT
MAMMOTHS WERE A TOTALLY
NEW SPECIES OF ELEPHANT.
BUT THIS REVELATION
WAS AS NOTHING
COMPARED TO CUVIER'S
NEXT BOMBSHELL.
CUVIER ARGUED THAT SINCE NO
ONE HAD EVER SEEN A MAMMOTH,
DESPITE BEING
IMPOSSIBLE TO MISS,
THEY MUST ALL AT SOME
POINT IN THE DISTANT PAST
HAVE GONE
EXTINCT.
AND THIS, TO THE MANY PEOPLE WHO
BELIEVED THAT GOD'S UNIVERSE
WAS FIXED AND UNCHANGING,
WAS NOT JUST BAFFLING
BUT DEEPLY
DISTURBING.
AND IT WASN'T
JUST MAMMOTHS.
BEFORE LONG HUNDREDS OF
OTHER STRANGE LOOKING FOSSILS
UNLIKE ANYTHING
ALIVE TODAY
WERE BEING IDENTIFIED AS
CREATURES THAT HAD ALL
MYSTERIOUSLY DISAPPEARED
OFF THE FACE OF THE EARTH.
THE ONLY CONSOLATION WAS
THAT THIS WAS A HISTORY OF LIFE
WHICH HUMANS STILL REGARDED
THEMSELVES AS SEPARATE FROM.
FOR NOW THE MOST PRESSING
QUESTION RAISED BY EXTINCTION
WAS ONE OF TIME...
AND WHETHER THIS
EXTRAORDINARY FOSSIL RECORD
OF LONG-LOST SPECIES MIGHT
BE EVIDENCE THAT THE EARTH
WAS IN FACT MUCH OLDER
THAN PREVIOUSLY BELIEVED.
THE 18TH CENTURY WAS
THE AGE OF THE EXPERIMENT.
THERE WERE EXPERIMENTS
ON LIGHT, LIQUIDS, GASES,
BUT ALSO A ROUGH
AND READY EXPERIMENT
BY THE FRENCH ARISTOCRAT
LE COMTE DE BUFFON
TO ESTABLISH THE
PRECISE AGE OF THE EARTH.
TRANSLATOR: THE GENERAL
FEELING IN BUFFON'S TIME
WAS THAT THE EARTH WAS
AROUND 6,000 YEARS OLD,
SOME 4,000 YEARS
BEFORE JESUS CHRIST.
ON THE OTHER HAND THERE
WAS SOME SPECULATION
AMONGST THE
MATERIALISTS AND EPICUREANS
THAT THE WORLD MIGHT
BE, IN FACT, ETERNAL.
BUFFON'S BIG
CONTRIBUTION WAS TO
BRING TO THESE QUESTIONS
A SCIENTIFIC APPROACH...
A METHOD THAT
COULD BE VERIFIED
AND TESTED
EMPIRICALLY.
THE INSPIRATION FOR BUFFON'S
EXPERIMENT CAME FROM AN IDEA
THAT THE WORLD HAD STARTED
OFF AS A RED HOT LUMP OF IRON.
BUFFON REASONED THAT IF ONE
COULD WORK OUT HOW LONG
IT HAD TAKEN FOR THE EARTH
TO COOL TO ITS PRESENT STATE
ONE COULD THEN GO ON TO
WORK OUT JUST HOW OLD IT WAS.
TRANSLATOR: BUFFON TOOK SOME
METAL BALLS OF DIFFERENT SIZES,
TEN IN ALL, FROM HALF AN INCH
IN DIAMETER UP TO FIVE INCHES.
HE THEN HEATED THEM
UNTIL THEY WERE WHITE HOT
BEFORE MEASURING
THE TIME IT TOOK
FOR THEM TO
COOL DOWN AGAIN.
BY TIMING HOW LONG IT TOOK
FOR HIS VARIOUS IRON BALLS
TO COOL DOWN, BUFFON WAS
CONFIDENT THAT HE COULD
EXTRAPOLATE HIS FIGURES
TO ESTABLISH HOW LONG
IT HAD TAKEN THE EARTH
TO REACH A SIMILAR STATE.
TRANSLATOR: BUFFON
ARRIVED AT THREE FIGURES.
THE FIRST WAS
ABOUT 37,500 YEARS,
THE AGE AT WHICH THE EARTH
WAS ABLE TO SUPPORT LIFE.
THE SECOND FIGURE,
AROUND 75,000 YEARS,
WAS THE ACTUAL AGE OF THE
EARTH UP TO THE PRESENT DAY.
BUT THEN HE ALSO CAME
UP WITH A THIRD NUMBER
OF 160,000 YEARS, THE
AGE AT WHICH THE EARTH
WOULD BE SO COLD THAT
LIFE WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE.
NO MATTER HOW
INACCURATE WE NOW KNOW
BUFFON'S FINDINGS TO BE, IT
WOULD BE SOMEWHAT CHURLISH
TO LET THAT DETRACT
FROM HIS LEGACY.
TRANSLATOR: I BELIEVE THAT
BUFFON SHOULD GO DOWN
IN SCIENTIFIC HISTORY BECAUSE
HE SHOWED HOW QUESTIONS
OF NATURAL HISTORY
SHOULD BE APPROACHED
- NOT THROUGH
THEOLOGICAL SPECULATION
BUT BY APPLYING
PHYSICAL FACTS.
AND THIS SCIENTIFIC APPROACH
WOULD NOW BE INTENSIFIED
BY A WHOLE NEW WAY OF
LOOKING AT THE WORLD...
A BRAND NEW BRANCH OF
SCIENCE CALLED GEOLOGY.
ACROSS LATE 18TH
CENTURY EUROPE,
PRACTICALLY DRESSED MEN
ARMED WITH SMALL HAMMERS
BEGAN TO HEAD OFF
INTO THE COUNTRYSIDE
IN SEARCH OF THE EARTH'S
MOST HIDDEN SECRETS.
IT WASN'T LONG BEFORE
THEY STARTED TO NOTICE
A NUMBER OF STRANGE
ANOMALIES IN THE LANDSCAPE.
SICCAR POINT IN SCOTLAND
IS FAMOUS FOR A PECULIAR
ROCKY OUTCROP THAT
ONE EARLY GEOLOGIST
DESCRIBED AS LIKE LOOKING
INTO "THE ABYSS OF TIME".
DR. CLARE BOND IS A
LECTURER IN EARTH SCIENCES
FROM GLASGOW
UNIVERSITY.
WHAT WE HAVE HERE ARE A SERIES
OF ROCKS THAT ARE VERTICAL
AND A SECOND SET OF ROCKS
ABOVE WHICH ARE HORIZONTAL
AND BETWEEN THE TWO
THERE'S A CONTACT.
THIS IS WHAT WE CALL
AN UNCONFORMITY
AND WHEN IT
WAS FOUND,
AND OTHER EXAMPLES LIKE
IT ACROSS SCOTLAND,
IT REALLY EXCITED THE
GEOLOGISTS AT THE TIME...
PROMPTING SOME OF THEM TO PUT
FORWARD A RADICAL EXPLANATION.
WHAT WE NOW KNOW IS ACTUALLY
THESE ROCKS WERE PART OF
AN OCEAN THAT SEPARATED
SCOTLAND FROM ENGLAND
AND IT WAS ACTUALLY
DURING THAT PROCESS
OF THE OCEAN CLOSING
THAT THESE ROCKS
WERE PUSHED TOGETHER
INTO THE VERTICAL LAYERS.
AND ON TOP OF THAT
THESE ROCKS WERE LAID DOWN
AND THEY'RE KIND OF NICE SUN
STONES THAT YOU SEE TODAY.
ALL OF WHICH COULD
MEAN ONLY ONE THING...
ALTHOUGH THE FIRST
GEOLOGISTS MIGHT NOT KNOW
WHAT WE KNOW TODAY,
WHAT THEY DID CONCLUDE
WAS THAT IT WOULD
HAVE TAKEN A LONG TIME
FOR THESE ROCKS TO HAVE
GONE FROM BEING HORIZONTAL
TO BEING PUSHED UP
IN A VERTICAL POSITION.
SO WHAT WE HAVE HERE REALLY
FROZEN INTO THE ROCKS
IS A HUGE
REPRESENTATION OF TIME
AND THAT BECAME
KNOWN AS "DEEP TIME"
AND IT WAS QUITE A
REVOLUTIONARY CONCEPT
WHERE WE WENT FROM
THINKING ABOUT THE EARTH
BEING THOUSANDS
OF YEARS OLD
INTO MILLIONS OF YEARS
OLD OR EVEN OLDER.
AND IT WASN'T JUST
SICCAR POINT.
THE EVIDENCE FOR SLOW
CHANGE WAS EVERYWHERE.
THE GEOLOGISTS LOOKED AT
WATERFALLS AND SAW HOW THE
CONSTANT FLOW OF WATER HAD
ERODED THE SURROUNDING ROCK.
THEY OBSERVED HOW RAIN
HAD INEXORABLY WORN AWAY
THE TOPS OF
MOUNTAINS...
AND HOW THE SLOW
MOVEMENT OF GLACIERS
HAD CARVED OUT
ENTIRE VALLEYS.
THEY CAME TO A VIEW THAT THE
SINGLE MOST IMPORTANT FACTOR
IN THE CREATION OF
OUR PLANET WAS TIME.
SO MUCH TIME, IN FACT, AS TO
MAKE OUR OWN HUMAN HISTORY
LOOK COMPLETELY AND
UTTERLY INSIGNIFICANT.
SO WHY DID THIS CONCEPT OF
DEEP TIME TAKE ROOT NOW?
THERE WAS THE EXPANSION
OF QUARRYING AND MINING,
EXPOSING MORE OF
THE HIDDEN EARTH.
THE FOSSILS OF EXTINCT CREATURES
THAT WERE BEING UNCOVERED.
AND THE EMERGENCE
OF GEOLOGY,
A NEW SCIENTIFIC
VIEW OF THE PLANET.
FINALLY THE PIECES WERE IN PLACE
TO TRY AND ANSWER THE QUESTION
OF HOW DID WE GET HERE -
A QUESTION BEING DRIVEN
BY A NEW FORCE IN
WESTERN EUROPE.
THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
WAS A TIME OF RAPID
AND DIZZYING
CHANGE.
GREAT CITIES BEGAN TO SPREAD
ACROSS VICTORIAN BRITAIN,
THEIR FACTORIES DRAWING IN
WORKERS FROM FAR AND WIDE.
NEW RAILWAYS CRISSCROSSED
THE LANDSCAPE
CUTTING
JOURNEY TIMES
AND BRINGING CHEAP
GOODS TO THE MASSES.
IT WAS A WHIRLWIND OF NEW
IDEAS AND NEW METHODS,
AND ALL OF IT IN THE
NAME OF PROGRESS.
BELIEF IN PROGRESS WAS
ONE OF THE DEFINING
CHARACTERISTICS OF
THE VICTORIAN AGE.
FACTORY BOSSES
FROM HUMBLE ORIGINS
NOW POSSESSED VAST
WEALTH AND POWER...
WHILE BRITAIN HERSELF
HAD BEEN TRANSFORMED INTO
THE WORLD'S LEADING
INDUSTRIAL NATION.
IT WAS FROM THIS
WORLD OF PROGRESS
THAT A RADICAL TAKE
ON HOW WE GOT HERE
EXPLODED INTO
VICTORIAN SOCIETY.
IT PROPOSED THAT NOT ONLY
WERE SOCIETIES AND NATIONS
CAPABLE OF PROGRESSIVE
CHANGE, BUT ALSO NATURE.
IN 1844 THIS SLIM RATHER
ORDINARY LOOKING VOLUME
BECAME ONE OF THE MOST
CONTROVERSIAL BOOKS
OF THE
VICTORIAN AGE.
CALLED VESTIGES OF THE
NATURAL HISTORY OF CREATION
IT WOULD GO ON TO SELL
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF COPIES.
VESTIGES BECAME ONE OF THE
MOST WIDELY KNOWN BOOKS
IN VICTORIAN BRITAIN.
IT WAS TALKED ABOUT EVERYWHERE
FROM BUCKINGHAM PALACE,
QUEEN VICTORIA
AND PRINCE ALBERT,
TO PUBS AND CLUBS AND
MECHANICS INSTITUTES
THROUGHOUT
THE COUNTRY.
ADDING TO ITS MYSTIQUE WAS
THE FACT THAT ITS AUTHOR
MADE STRENUOUS EFFORTS
THROUGHOUT HIS LIFETIME
TO REMAIN STRICTLY
ANONYMOUS.
HIS NAME WAS
ROBERT CHAMBERS.
CHAMBERS WAS BORN WITH
SOMETHING QUITE UNUSUAL...
HE HAD SIX FINGERS
AND SIX TOES.
THE OPERATION TO TRY
AND CURE THIS WAS A FAILURE
AND IT REALLY
LEFT HIM LAME.
I THINK THIS TENDED TO
INCREASE THE TENDENCY HE HAD
TO BE VERY INTERESTED
IN BOOKS AND READING.
HE DESCRIBES SPENDING
AFTERNOONS IN THE ATTIC
OF HIS HOUSE WHERE
HE'D ROAM THROUGH
THE ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA
"LIKE A BEE", HE SAID.
HE LOVED BOOKS.
ALONG WITH HIS BROTHER,
CHAMBERS SET UP A SUCCESSFUL
PUBLISHING FIRM USING THE NEW
STEAM POWERED PRINTING PRESSES
TRANSFORMING
PUBLISHING AT THAT TIME.
BUT HE WAS ALSO
A PROLIFIC WRITER.
ROBERT CHAMBERS WAS
ONE OF THE MOST SKILLED
AND KNOWLEDGEABLE AUTHORS
OF THE VICTORIAN PERIOD.
HE KNEW HIS
AUDIENCE.
THAT WAS PARTLY BY
WRITING OVER 30 BOOKS.
SO IN THE EARLY 1840'S HE
WITHDRAWS TO THE GOLFING TOWN
OF ST. ANDREWS AND DECIDES
TO WRITE A PHILOSOPHICAL WORK
THAT'S GOING TO DEAL WITH
THE FULL RANGE OF CREATION...
A BOOK IN WHICH CHAMBERS
PRESENTED A COMPELLING CASE
FOR THE NOTION THAT
SPECIES WERE NOT FIXED.
THEY CHANGE.
THAT EVERYTHING HAD
DEVELOPED FROM AN EARLIER FORM.
CHAMBERS CALLED THE
CONCEPT "TRANSMUTATION".
WE CALL IT
EVOLUTION.
EVOLUTION EMERGED OUT
OF A WORLD OF PROGRESS
CONVINCED THAT ALL
THINGS ARE CAPABLE
OF CHANGE, OF
IMPROVEMENT.
A HISTORY OF LIFE THAT WAS
AS DIVERSE AS IT WAS BAFFLING
AND A REALIZATION THAT THE EARTH
WAS ALMOST IMMEASURABLY OLD.
BUT THE REAL SIGNIFICANCE
OF EVOLUTION TO THIS STORY
IS THAT IT NOW FORCED
PEOPLE TO CONFRONT THE
UNCOMFORTABLE QUESTION
OF HOW DID WE GET HERE.
BECAUSE INSTEAD OF BEING SET
APART FROM THE REST OF CREATION
ROBERT CHAMBERS WAS
SAYING THAT WE WERE SIMPLY
AN EXTENSION OF IT.
FOR A SOCIETY WHERE
MANY STILL BELIEVED HUMANS
HELD A SPECIAL PLACE IN
GOD'S CREATION, THIS CLAIM
THAT WE WERE DESCENDED FROM
ANIMALS WAS DEEPLY SHOCKING.
IT BECAME CLEAR THAT A LOT
OF MEN OF SCIENCE ESPECIALLY
WERE VERY WORRIED
ABOUT THE BOOK;
NOT ALL OF THEM,
BUT MOST OF THEM...
AND THERE WAS A LOT OF CRITICISM
OF SPECIFIC FACTS IN VESTIGES.
THEY BEGAN TO BLAST AWAY AT
INDIVIDUAL POINTS IN THE BOOK.
BUT DESPITE THE CONTROVERSY,
OR MORE LIKELY BECAUSE OF IT,
THE PUBLIC SIMPLY COULDN'T
GET ENOUGH OF THE BOOK.
VESTIGES, QUITE SIMPLY,
PUT EVOLUTION ON THE MAP.
NOT JUST FOR THE
VICTORIANS BUT FOR US.
BUT FOR ALL ITS SUCCESS, WHAT
CHAMBERS' BOOK DIDN'T DO
WAS COME UP WITH
ANY EXPLANATION
OF WHY EVOLUTION
HAPPENS.
THE MAN WHO WOULD GO ON
TO ANSWER THAT QUESTION
WAS OF COURSE
CHARLES DARWIN.
A KEEN GEOLOGIST
AND ARDENT BELIEVER
IN THE EARTH'S ANTIQUITY,
DARWIN HAD BEEN WORKING ON
HIS OWN THEORY OF
EVOLUTION FOR SEVERAL YEARS
WHEN VESTIGES
FIRST APPEARED.
BUT IT WOULD BE A FURTHER
15 YEARS, BY WHICH TIME
MUCH OF THE FUSS SURROUNDING
EVOLUTION HAD DIED DOWN,
BEFORE DARWIN FELT
READY TO PUBLISH.
HIS EXPLANATION FOR HOW ANIMALS
EVOLVE HAD ITS ROOTS IN THE SAME
INDUSTRIAL LANDSCAPE FROM WHICH
CHAMBERS' BOOK HAD EMERGED.
ACCORDING TO DARWIN, LIFE WAS
ONE LONG STRUGGLE FOR SURVIVAL
AND JUST AS INDUSTRY
INVOLVED COMPETITION
BETWEEN MANUFACTURERS,
SO NATURE WAS DRIVEN
BY COMPETITION BETWEEN
INDIVIDUAL ORGANISMS.
IN THE SAME WAY THAT NEW
TECHNOLOGY COULD GIVE
ONE FACTORY AN EDGE OVER
ANOTHER, SO IT WAS IN NATURE.
ANY TRAIT THAT GAVE AN
ORGANISM AN EDGE OVER ITS RIVAL
WOULD PREVAIL AND BECOME MORE
COMMON IN LATER GENERATIONS
GRADUALLY GIVING RISE TO THE
APPEARANCE OF NEW SPECIES...
A MECHANISM FOR CHANGE THAT
DARWIN CALLED NATURAL SELECTION.
BUT WHILE DARWIN HAD
IDENTIFIED THE CRUCIAL ROLE
PLAYED BY THE ENVIRONMENT IN
FORCING CHANGE WITHIN SPECIES,
WHAT HE HAD NO WAY
OF KNOWING WAS
THE INCREDIBLE EXTENT
TO WHICH ALL NEW LIFE
HAS BEEN INFLUENCED
BY OUR PLANET...
A KNOWLEDGE THAT HAS
ONLY RELATIVELY RECENTLY
COME TO LIGHT.
WHILE BIOLOGY RACED AHEAD
IN THE EARLY 20TH CENTURY,
GEOLOGY HAD MORE OR LESS
SETTLED INTO A ROUTINE.
STONES WERE DATED, FOSSILS
EXAMINED, COLLECTIONS EXPANDED.
BUT AS SO OFTEN IN
THE HISTORY OF SCIENCE
IT'S THE NON
SPECIALISTS,
THE ENTHUSIASTS
WHO SHAKE THINGS UP.
ONE SUCH ENTHUSIAST WAS
THE GERMAN METEOROLOGIST
ALFRED WEGENER WHO WOULD
SHOCK THE SCIENTIFIC WORLD
BY PROPOSING A RADICAL AND
CONTROVERSIAL NEW THEORY
ABOUT THE FORCES
THAT SHAPED THE EARTH...
FORCES SO POWERFUL AS TO
HAVE SHAPED EVEN LIFE ITSELF.
THE STORY GOES THAT WEGENER
WAS LOOKING AT AN ATLAS
WHEN HE WAS STRUCK BY AN
UNCANNY SIMILARITY IN SHAPE
BETWEEN THE COASTLINES OF
SOUTH AMERICA AND AFRICA.
SO WELL DID THEY
APPEAR TO FIT
THAT IT LOOKED AS IF
THEY HAD ONCE BEEN JOINED.
NOW WHILE OTHERS HAD
ALSO NOTICED THIS,
WEGENER HAD
AN EXPLANATION...
ONE INSPIRED BY HIS
METEOROLOGICAL FIELDWORK
IN THE ARCTIC
CIRCLE.
WEGENER PROPOSED THAT ALL
THE SEVEN GREAT CONTINENTS
HAD BEEN CLUMPED TOGETHER
IN A SINGLE SUPERCONTINENT
THAT HE CALLED PANGAEA,
MEANING "ALL LANDS".
AND THEN, LIKE THE
HUGE FLOATING ICEBERGS
HE'D SEEN ON HIS FIELD
TRIPS TO GREENLAND,
PANGAEA HAD
SIMPLY DRIFTED APART.
BUT INSTEAD OF BLOCKS OF ICE
WEIGHING A FEW THOUSAND TONS,
WEGENER WAS TALKING
ABOUT GREAT SLABS OF ROCK
WEIGHING LITERALLY
TRILLIONS OF TONS.
THE PROBLEM FOR
WEGENER WAS THAT
HE HAD NO WAY TO
EXPLAIN HIS THEORY.
NO HARD EVIDENCE WITH WHICH
TO CONVINCE THE SKEPTICS.
AND SO THE
THEORY WAS SHELVED.
WEGENER WENT BACK
TO HIS METEOROLOGY
AND THAT MIGHT
HAVE BEEN THAT,
BUT FOR A SERIES OF
UNEXPECTED DISCOVERIES
MADE DURING THE
HEIGHT OF THE COLD WAR.
AS THE NUCLEAR ARMS
RACE GATHERED MOMENTUM,
SO BOTH THE UNITED STATES
AND THE SOVIET UNION
FOUND THEMSELVES
INVOLVED IN A DEADLY GAME
OF CAT AND MOUSE DEEP
BENEATH THE OCEAN.
A GAME THAT CALLED FOR A
MUCH MORE ACCURATE PICTURE
OF THIS UNDERWATER
LANDSCAPE.
AND SO THE SCIENTISTS ROLLED UP
THEIR SLEEVES AND GOT TO WORK.
THEY BEGAN TAKING THOUSANDS OF
PHOTOGRAPHS OF THE OCEAN FLOOR.
ECHO SOUNDINGS PLOTTED THE RISE
AND FALL OF DEEP SEA RIDGES
WHILE DRILL RODS WERE
SENT DOWN TO ESTABLISH
THE COMPOSITION
OF THE SEA BED.
BUT IN MAPPING THE OCEANS
THE SCIENTISTS DISCOVERED
SOMETHING
ENTIRELY UNEXPECTED.
THEY FOUND THAT THE SEA
FLOOR DIDN'T CONSIST OF
ONE THICK UNIFORM CRUST
AS WAS ONCE THOUGHT,
BUT A NUMBER OF THIN
INTERLOCKING PLATES.
AND THAT THE BOUNDARIES
TO THESE PLATES FEATURED
MOUNTAIN RANGES, DEEP RIFT
VALLEYS, EVEN VOLCANOES.
AND TO TOP IT ALL OFF,
THIS ENTIRE LANDSCAPE
WAS FLOATING ON A
BED OF MOLTEN ROCK
JUST AS WEGENER
HAD PREDICTED.
AND YOU CAN ACTUALLY
SEE EVIDENCE OF THIS
AT SOMEWHERE CALLED
THINGVELLIR IN ICELAND,
WIDELY REGARDED AS
ONE OF THE GEOLOGICAL
WONDERS OF
THE WORLD.
THINGVELLIR'S VERY
IMPORTANT TO GEOLOGISTS
BECAUSE IT'S ONE OF THE
ONLY PLACES ON EARTH
THAT WE CAN ACTUALLY
SEE THE JUNCTURE
OF TWO VERY LARGE
TECTONIC PLATES.
TO ONE SIDE OF THINGVELLIR
IS WHAT'S KNOWN AS
THE EURASIAN PLATE
STRETCHING ALL THE WAY
FROM ICELAND TO THE
EASTERN COAST OF CHINA.
ON THE OTHER, THE
NORTH AMERICAN PLATE
WHICH EXTENDS
7,000 KILOMETERS
IN THE OPPOSITE
DIRECTION.
NOW IF YOU WERE TO
STAND HERE LONG ENOUGH,
SAY A FEW
THOUSAND YEARS,
YOU'D BEGIN TO NOTICE
THAT THE GAP BETWEEN
NORTH AMERICA AND
EURASIA WAS GETTING WIDER.
PETE LAFEMINA IS PART OF
THE TEAM THAT HAS BEEN
MONITORING THIS SPREADING
FOR THE LAST 15 YEARS.
ONE OF THE HYPOTHESES
THAT WEGENER HAD IN 1912
WAS THAT CURRENTS
IN THE MANTLE,
WHAT WE NOW KNOW
AS MANTLE CONVECTION,
WERE ACTUALLY HELPING TO
MOVE THE TECTONIC PLATES.
SO TODAY WE HAVE
MANTLE MATERIAL
THAT COMES UP AT
MID OCEAN RIDGES,
FOR EXAMPLE RIGHT BENEATH
OUR FEET HERE AT THINGVELLIR,
AND THAT DRIVES
THE PLATES APART.
WITH THE AID OF
MODERN TECHNOLOGY
PETE IS ABLE TO
RECORD THIS MOVEMENT.
THINGVELLIR IS SPREADING AT
SEVEN MILLIMETERS PER YEAR.
WE KNOW THIS BECAUSE
WE'RE ABLE TO MEASURE IT
QUITE PRECISELY USING THE
GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM.
WE CAN SET UP A GPS RECEIVER
ON ONE SIDE OF THE VALLEY
AND ON THE OTHER SIDE AND
MEASURE VERY PRECISELY
HOW MUCH THE VALLEY
IS OPENING OVER TIME.
OVER THE TIMEFRAME
OF OUR MEASUREMENTS
WE'RE SEEING MILLIMETER
PER YEAR TYPES OF RATES.
BUT OVER GEOLOGIC TIME
THE VALLEY HAS OPENED
AT LEAST 20
KILOMETERS.
AS THESE PLATES ARE
BEING DRIVEN APART,
AT ANOTHER LOCATION THEY
HAVE TO BE CONVERGING.
OVER HUNDREDS OF
MILLIONS OF YEARS
THIS PUSHING AND PULLING
OF THE EARTH'S PLATES
HAS HELPED TRANSFORM
THE FACE OF OUR PLANET,
A NEVER-ENDING CYCLE
OF GEOLOGICAL CHANGE
TO WHICH WEGENER GAVE THE
NAME "CONTINENTAL DRIFT".
BUT CONTINENTAL DRIFT HAS DONE
MUCH MORE THAN SHAPE THE EARTH.
IT ALSO TAKES US CLOSER
TO SOLVING THE MYSTERY
OF HOW WE GOT HERE.
AND THAT'S BECAUSE WHEN
THE EARTH MOVES IN THIS WAY
THE RESULTS CAN ALSO
BE INCREDIBLY VIOLENT.
WHEN THE EARTH'S
PLATES COLLIDE
THEY CAN TRIGGER VOLCANIC
ERUPTIONS SO POWERFUL
AS TO BLOCK OUT THE
SUN FOR MONTHS ON END.
AS THOSE SAME PLATES
GRIND AGAINST EACH OTHER
SO THEY CAN ALSO CAUSE
DEVASTATING EARTHQUAKES
WHICH THEMSELVES CAN
SPAWN MEGA TSUNAMIS
THAT WILL DESTROY
ANYTHING IN THEIR WAY.
BUT WHILE IT'S EASY TO IMAGINE
THAT ALL THIS VIOLENT UPHEAVAL
HAS BROUGHT WITH IT NOTHING
BUT DEATH AND DESTRUCTION,
THE TRUTH IS
VERY DIFFERENT.
IT'S NOW CLEAR THAT THROUGHOUT
OUR 4.5 BILLION YEAR HISTORY
THE VIOLENCE OF OUR PLANET
HAS BEEN ABSOLUTELY CENTRAL
TO THE CREATION OF NEW LIFE
- MAKING CONTINENTAL DRIFT
ONE OF THE GREAT
DRIVERS OF EVOLUTION.
AND HERE ARE JUST A
COUPLE OF EXAMPLES.
SOME 30 MILLION YEARS
AGO THE PLATE BOUNDARIES
SEPARATING AFRICA FROM
ARABIA BEGAN TO PULL APART
CAUSING THE LAND IN
BETWEEN TO FALL AWAY.
A 5,000 KILOMETER GASH
IN THE EARTH'S CRUST
THAT WE KNOW AS THE
EAST AFRICAN RIFT VALLEY.
AND AS A NEW LANDSCAPE OF
BROKEN SAVANNA FORMED
IT ALLOWED THE ANCESTORS
OF MANY OF TODAY'S ANIMALS
TO GAIN A FOOTHOLD
AND FLOURISH.
AND THEN THERE'S OUR CLIMATE
WHERE IT TURNS OUT THAT
CONTINENTAL DRIFT HAS
ALSO PLAYED A MAJOR ROLE.
ACCELERATING THE ONSET OF ICE
AGES BY PUSHING LAND TOWARDS
THE POLES AND ALTERING THE
FLOW OF OCEAN CURRENTS...
CHANGES WHICH HAVE
FORCED ANIMALS TO ADAPT
IN THE MOST
REMARKABLE OF WAYS.
AND JUST OCCASIONALLY
WE'RE SUBJECTED
TO VIOLENCE FROM WAY
BEYOND OUR PLANET
SO EXTREME THAT MANY SPECIES
ARE WIPED OUT ALTOGETHER.
ONLY FOR OTHERS
TO TAKE THEIR PLACE.
IT'S NOW CLEAR THAT
THE STORY OF LIFE
AND THE STORY
OF OUR PLANET,
WHICH WERE ONCE
SEEN AS SEPARATE,
ARE IN FACT
INTRINSICALLY LINKED.
AND WHAT OF US?
HOW DID WE
GET HERE?
WELL, WE'RE JUST THE LATEST IN
A LONG LINE OF LUCKY SURVIVORS
BORN OUT OF DEATH, DESTRUCTION
AND THE IMMENSITY OF DEEP TIME.
AND IF THIS RANDOM EXPERIMENT
THAT IS LIFE ON EARTH
WERE TO BE
RUN AGAIN
WE MIGHT NEVER
EVEN SHOW UP.